---
layout: post
title: Installing python and Stan
date: 2016-02-22 14:40:45
---

Before we get started we'll need to download and install python and Stan.  

## Why python?
Stan is not a complete programming language.  All data manipulation and manipulation of the final samples generated by Stan must be performed by a second language.  We use python as that second language but Stan makes it easy to use a variety of languages for this purpose including julia, R, and Stata.  Most of the code and examples should be quite similar if using these other languages.  


## Installing Python
To install python, we recommend that you download the Anaconda python distribution available from [here](https://www.continuum.io/downloads).  The Anaconda python includes the python language as well as the python packages most commonly used for data science (including several that we use in our examples) and a convenient package manager. This means that python will work right out of the box without having to install additional packages.  We are using python version 3.5 in all of the examples but the examples should work on python version 2.7 as well.

## Why Stan?
In our opinion, Stan is by far the easiest language to perform Bayesian inference in.  The Stan documentation focuses on the speed advantages over other languages, but it is the solid implementation, extensive documentation, and large community that really make Stan stand out from the rest for us.  In our limited experience testing out JAGS, PyMC and Stata's built-in tools for Bayesian inference, these other tools are either buggy (JAGS), have limited documentation (PyMC), or have limited features (Stata).  

## Installing Stan
After installing Anaconda (see above), type the following in the terminal to install pyStan, the version of Stan for the python langauge.

```shell
conda install pystan
```

To test that python and pyStan were installed correctly, type the following in a terminal:

```shell
python
>>>import pystan
```
If you don't get any errors, you're set!
